Welcome to JW Broadcasting.
Let's look briefly at some of the items that have been prepared for you.
You'll meet a brother from Russia who was born in a labour camp in Siberia
and was later in prison for his faith.
But in spite of many challenges, he has always kept his joy and trusted in Jehovah.
You will also enjoy learning more about the preaching work in the countries of Tanzania,
Kenya and Malawi.
We joined a headquarters representative on his recent visit to these African countries.
And have you ever wondered how the truth reaches individuals inside prison walls?
Let's find out.
You'll enjoy hearing the experience of how a former inmate drew close to Jehovah while in prison.
This is the June program of JW Broadcasting.
This month we'll discuss something that is treasured by all of God's people,
no matter where we live and no matter what language we speak.
Our subject is the divine name of our Heavenly Father.
As you realise in the Hebrew that name is represented by four Hebrew letters
they can be transliterated into English as YHWH or JHVH.
And this Hebrew name is commonly pronounced in English as Jehovah.
Acts chapter 15 verses 14 and 17 tells us that Jehovah has taken out from the nations
a people for his name.
And we are proud to be the people who bear his name today as Jehovah's Witnesses.
By contrast, most religions that claim to follow the Bible no longer accept or honour that holy name.
In some cases they have purged it from their copies of the Bible and even banned its use in their church services.
But as serious students of God's word we're not surprised by this turn of events.
Notice please the words that are recorded in Jeremiah 23 and verse 27.
Here Jehovah speaks of those who are false prophets.
Notice what he said that they would try to do.
They intend to make my people forget my name.
Can someone really be made to forget his Father's name?
As impossible as that may seem, that's exactly what Satan has been trying to do.
Make people forget Jehovah's name.
How vital it is that we continue to declare Jehovah's name to all, near and far.
But why do so many translators remove Jehovah's name from their translations of the Bible and replace it with such titles as Lord or God?
In this month's program we're going to examine two of the common reasons that they give.
We'll also see why those reasons are not valid at all.
And in so doing we will enhance our appreciation for the new world translation of the Holy Scriptures.
So what is one reason given for removing God's name from the Bible?
Some translators have said that they're following an ancient Jewish tradition.
An example of this is found in the preface of a translation that was released in 1935.
It's said in part and I'll quote it.
In this translation we have followed the Orthodox Jewish tradition and substituted the Lord for the name Yahweh.
And the phrase the Lord God for the phrase the Lord Yahweh.
And of quote.
It's true that at one point in history the Jewish people stop pronouncing God's name when they were reading aloud from the Hebrew Scriptures.
However, please note these important facts.
First of all, although because of superstition the Jews stop pronouncing God's name out loud, they never removed it from the Scriptures.
In fact, even today if you buy a Hebrew Bible in Israel you can see the four letters forming the tetragramatine.
These letters are still found thousands of times in the Hebrew text of the Bible.
Another point, the Jewish people even use the tetragramatine in their rabbinical writings such as the Mishnah.
And yet another point, interestingly, scholars who translated the Christian Greek Scriptures into Hebrew in the 16th century CE
naturally included the divine name when rendering quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures because it's found in all standard Hebrew texts.
So it wasn't the Jewish people who removed God's name from the Hebrew Scriptures.
Rather it was apostate Christians who took the tradition one step further and actually removed the name of God from the translations of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Still, as mentioned earlier, the Jews did adopt the tradition of not pronouncing God's name.
Jesus warned the Jewish people of His day about clinging to their traditions.
He even said as recorded in Matthew 15 verses 3 through 6 that they made the Word of God invalid by means of their traditions.
Of course, not all traditions are automatically wrong, are they?
But is the tradition of refusing to pronounce the divine name reasonable?
Is it applied consistently? No.
We can say so for three reasons.
The first reason, the practice may have developed due to an extremist interpretation of the third commandment as stated at Exodus 20 verse 7, which says,
you must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way.
However, that very Bible verse uses God's name twice.
Many other verses, such as Psalm 148 verse 13, encourage us to praise the name of Jehovah.
The second reason, the Jews continued to pronounce the divine name as part of their personal names.
Name such as Joshua, Hezekiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah and many others contained part of Jehovah's name.
So every time the Jews used these names, they were in fact pronouncing part of Jehovah's name.
The third reason, Jehovah had his name recorded thousands of times in the Bible for our benefit and our use.
If he didn't want us to use his name, then why did he reveal it to mankind?
When Manoa asked Jehovah's Angel as recorded in Judges 13, 17 and 18,
what is your name so that we may honor you when your word comes true?
Jehovah's Angel said to him, why are you asking about my name?
Seeing that it is a wonderful one.
The angel refused to reveal his name to Manoa.
Jehovah could have done the same, but he didn't.
He told us his name.
So rather than trying to follow a so-called ancient Jewish tradition, we follow the example of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Notice what he said in prayer to his father as recorded in John 17 and verse 26.
I have made your name known to them and will make it known so that the love with which you love me may be in them and I in union with them.
Another reason often given by translators for not using God's name in the text of their translations is that they don't know the exact pronunciation of the original name.
Some scholars feel that the original pronunciation was closer to Yahweh rather than Jehovah.
Others feel that it may have been Jehovah.
Just how important is the exact pronunciation of the original Hebrew name?
Could we get sidetracked by trying to determine what that pronunciation was?
Well first of all, let's establish why we use the pronunciation Jehovah in English.
Is it because it's the closest pronunciation to the original?
No. We use the name Jehovah because it's widely recognized in English.
Is this a reasonable position to take?
Yes. That's what we do in other languages.
Usually we don't try to say Jehovah's name exactly the same way in every language.
For example, in some of the languages of the South Pacific where I served as a missionary, the divine name is pronounced as Jehovah or Jehovah.
Each pronunciation was established by local Bible translations and influenced by language characteristics.
These pronunciations became well established and familiar to people.
So it would be unreasonable to try to make people pronounce the name exactly the same in every language.
You may not have thought of this but even in English some of us say the name slightly differently because of our different accents.
Some say Jehovah, others Jehovah, others Jehovah or Jehovah.
So what's the point?
The pronunciation changes according to the rules of language or even due to individual accent.
So it's not necessary to try and say the divine name exactly the same way as in Hebrew.
In English the pronunciation Jehovah has a long history.
It goes back hundreds of years.
The first rendering of God's personal name in an English Bible appeared in 1530 in William Tindell's translation of the Pentateuch.
He used the form Jehovah.
Over time the English language changed and the spelling of the divine name was modernized to become Jehovah.
It's true though that some scholars would prefer Yahweh instead of Jehovah.
One such scholar was Joseph Rotherham.
When he originally translated the Rotherham emphasized Bible a literal translation in 1902.
He used God's name in his translation but preferred the form Yahweh.
However just a few years later in 1911 when he published his studies in the Psalms he returned to the form Jehovah.
Why? Well he still felt that Yahweh was a more accurate pronunciation but he used the form Jehovah.
He said because and I quote of the desirability of keeping in touch with the public here and I in a matter of this kind.
In which the principal thing is the easy recognition of the divine name end of quote.
In other words the name Jehovah was more commonly used in English.
But shouldn't we try to be as close as possible with our pronunciation of the divine name?
As already mentioned scholars do not agree on the exact pronunciation but even if they did that's not what is done with other names in the Bible.
For example let's consider the name Jesus.
That's the common pronunciation in English for the name of God's Son.
But imagine please if you were to go back in time to Jesus' day.
If you were to stand in public and call out the name Jesus in English would anyone know who you were referring to?
That would be unlikely.
At that time Jesus' name was probably pronounced even as either as Yeshua or Yahoshua as in Hebrew or Isus as in Greek.
And I'm sure you'll agree both of those forms are quite different from our English pronunciation.
Consider to this fact Jehovah didn't require that his son's name be spelled and pronounced the Hebrew way
when the Christian Greek scriptures were written.
He allowed the writers to use the common equivalent for Jesus' name in Greek even though it sounded a lot different from how it was pronounced in Hebrew.
Likewise today Jesus' name is pronounced differently in Spanish, in Italian and in German and many other languages.
So should we stop using the name Jesus because it was not pronounced that way in Hebrew or because it was pronounced differently in other languages?
Of course not.
It's also worth noting that in Hebrew Jesus' name had either three or four syllables according to how it may have been pronounced either Yeshua or Yahoshua.
But in English there are only two syllables in the name Jesus.
Obviously the number of syllables is not the main factor to be concerned about.
In a similar way we don't want to be sidetracked by arguing about the number of syllables in Jehovah's name in Hebrew, whether it should be three syllables as in Jehovah or just two as in Yahweh.
The main thing is that we use whatever pronunciation is common in our language.
The worst thing we could do is suppress the name of God by failing or refusing to use it.
How grateful we are to have the new world translation of the Holy Scriptures.
This translation is now available in part or in whole in 128 languages and 39 more languages are in the process of being translated.
Not only is this a clear, accurate translation of God's Word but more importantly it honors the name of Almighty God over 7000 times by translating it and not hiding it.
What a privilege we have to know and use the personal name of our loving Father Jehovah.
Have you had the opportunity to use the video does God have a name?
Many have used it to introduce the brochure good news from God.
That's the brochure the video is based on.
You'll be happy to know that another video in the same series has been prepared.
It is entitled, how can we be sure the Bible is true?
Some accuse the Bible of being a collection of myths and legends written by well-intentioned humans.
By contrast, the Bible says that it is the Word of God who cannot lie.
If the Bible was authored by God, it should be like no other book ever written.
For example, when it mentions scientific matters, what it says should be in harmony with proved science.
When it foretells the future, those prophecies should come through 100% of the time.
And if the Bible contains God's message to mankind, it should be available no matter where a person lives and no matter what is done to stop its distribution.
Is the Bible full of myths or is it accurate?
Consider just some of the evidence indicating that the Bible is truly an extraordinary and trustworthy book.
During the time when the Bible was written, many people had mistaken ideas about the shape of the earth.
A theory written after the Bible was completed was that the universe emerged from a cosmic egg
and that the earth is supported by various creatures.
In contrast, about the year 1473 BCE, Moses wrote that the earth is suspended upon nothing.
And around the year 732 BCE, the prophet Isaiah wrote that the earth is a circle or sphere.
These Bible writers contradicted ideas that were popular at the time.
It was some 200 years after Isaiah's day that the Greek philosopher, Pythagoras, may have proposed that the earth is a sphere.
And more than 3000 years passed from Moses' writing until scientists such as Isaac Newton realized that the earth seemed to hang upon nothing.
No human can foretell the future in exact detail.
Yet about the year 732 BCE, the prophet Isaiah foretell that a man named Cyrus would conquer the mighty city of Babylon,
that he would dry up a river, and that he would enter the city through open gates.
History confirms that every detail of this prophecy was fulfilled.
Concerning the same city, the prophet Jeremiah foretell that Babylon would become piles of stones and never again be inhabited.
Despite its strategic location, Babylon eventually became a pile of stones and remains that way.
Throughout history, powerful men have tried to stop the distribution or translation of the Bible.
They burned at the stake those who translated it into common languages and persecuted those who read it.
The Bible has weathered the most sustained attack of any book in history.
Yet it has become the most widely translated and published book of all time.
Billions of copies have been produced in some 2700 languages.
The Bible is scientifically accurate, contains reliable prophecy, and is available to all mankind.
You have good reason to believe that it is inspired by Jehovah, the God who cannot lie.
Still, you may ask, who is the author of the Bible? What is the Bible about?
How can you understand the Bible?
Those questions are answered in lesson 3 of the brochure, good news from God.
You can download a copy from JW.org.
Jehovah's Witnesses will be happy to study the Bible with you.
Fill in the online request for a Bible study, and a witness in your area will call to discuss the Bible at a time and place convenient for you.
I look forward to using that video in the ministry.
And did you notice that early in the video, the narrator said,
if the Bible is God's message to mankind, it should be available no matter where a person lives.
That fact echoes the words of the Apostle Peter in Acts 10, verses 34 and 35, where he says,
Now I truly understand that God is not partial, but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.
Knowing this about Jehovah's personality, we can be certain that there will soon be a time when all discrimination has been removed.
In some parts of the world, our brothers and sisters endure discrimination every day.
That was the case in South Africa during apartheid.
The word apartheid means separateness, and was a political policy that was implemented in the country in 1948.
By means of that policy, the government enforced strict separation of various racial groups.
For example, public facilities such as banks and post offices had separate sections for whites and non-whites,
but restaurants and cinemas were reserved for whites only.
This continued until the apartheid policy was dismantled in 1994.
But how can someone who was heavily involved in the separation of races be drawn to a God that is not partial?
We met two of our brothers in South Africa with just such a background.
I was a leader in a far-right organization that actively supported apartheid in the 1980s.
We were on holiday at the sea and there were only black lifeguards.
I said to my friends with me that I would rather drown before I would allow a black man to rescue me in the sea.
The second day we were there, the current pulled me out to sea, and the harder I tried to come out, the deeper the sea pulled me in.
The next moment I see this black man coming towards me, and I grab him around the neck and I almost wanted to kiss him.
That is how glad I was to see him, because I was drowning. I was totally exhausted. I could not go on.
Even though a black man saved my life, it did not change my attitude towards them.
I wanted to see South African society or community as non-racial, non-sexist, democratic society.
Before I was 21 years old, already I get involved in political education.
And I became a chairman of mass democratic movement.
For the first time South Africans were supposed to be educated on election.
We found that Jehovah's Witnesses, they also have a church in our community.
We asked them, can we come and teach the people how to elect in that part of the community.
And we were told that this is a church that cannot allow us to teach people elections in their premises, the militant one.
They wanted to go and bend the church.
One day we were driving as a delegation, we were black and white in that vehicle.
And we saw white witnesses were doing their public ministry.
And this driver, who I know you was racist, he said to me, Tony, do you see those white people?
I said, yes, he said, I hate those people.
I said, why? He said, no, I hate these people.
And I said, if they are hated by you, who is white? They must be good people.
Time started to change in the late 80s when they started to dismantle a part that.
But we aggressively tried to stop this from happening.
We even drove an armored vehicle smashing through the doors into the parliament buildings.
We were trying to see if we could resist these changes with a part that.
But this did not change things.
Even though I belonged to a church, I still drank heavily and had extramarital affairs.
This led to me and my wife getting divorced.
It was an empty life. I was never really happy.
I was committed to the three-volutionary course.
I would be absent, not at home, for the weeks.
One of politics is about Ajunit.
Ed political meetings, a lot of Ajuin take place.
When you go home, you end up Ajuin with your wife over nothing.
I came to another office and I saw in a desk of this colleague,
there's a book called Knowledge that can lead to a elastic life.
When I found in the book, the reason why Jesus was on earth,
especially to proclaim the kingdom, and this kingdom is a government.
And I worked for government, yet I have never had about this government.
Then I found out of the book, this is a real government that will come and solve all mankind problems.
I fell home among the others people.
I can feel genuine love, not just love, that we have in the world or anywhere.
Then I came. I never stopped attending meetings.
A friend of mine introduced me to the witnesses.
One of the brothers I met asked me,
if I prove from the Bible that something you believe is incorrect, what will you do?
I said, then I will become a witness.
He went on to show me in the Bible how the Bethlehem star was actually from the devil to lead the wise men to kill Jesus.
This changed my whole life. I said, now I can become a witness.
Being in the kingdom hall, I noticed that there were many black people.
This was strange for me, but the more I attended, the more I began to learn that with Jehovah, there is no partiality.
All people are equal.
We began to accept that this is the way it should be.
Johnny and I were brought together, even though we were from completely different political parties.
Before we would have wanted to kill each other, but now we have love for one another.
We have forgiven one another.
Jehovah's organization changes their person completely.
If I think back to the kind of person I was and what I am now, I never want to be what I was then.
Never. Yet it is such a privilege to be a witness.
People call me a softie, but I do not mind. I have become a softie, but for Jehovah.
I never thought that somebody like Pradachidion, who is coming from the extreme right organization,
can worship with me who is from an extreme left organization.
You can only think of Isaiah where he said.
The wolf and the lion will eat this straw, and the boy will play in the hole of a dangerous snake.
So the transformation of our personality plate has led us to be genuine brothers.
The two brothers, Johnny and Gideon, serve in the same congregation in the Northwest Province of South Africa.
And regularly do public witnessing together.
Old colleagues from their past careers in politics regularly come up to Johnny and Gideon to encourage them to pursue politics again.
That has given the brothers many good opportunities to witness to them about our loving, non-partial God.
Yes, no matter our circumstances, the truth about Jehovah penetrates whatever beliefs we have had in the past.
As long as we have an honest heart.
That also applies to those who have committed a crime and now have been sentenced to serve time in prison.
Did you know that in many countries around the world, special arrangements are being made to preach inside prison walls?
Those involved in prison witnessing meet many individuals that express a thirst for spiritual things.
My name is Glen Monroe Hamilton.
I'm in the Atlanta Federal Penitentiary.
I just need help.
We receive about a thousand requests each month from both men and women that are incarcerated throughout the United States territory.
We check and see what type of access the congregation might have that visiting that facility.
So some congregations are able to deliver the literature and then some congregations have one of the best arrangements which is a group Bible study.
Luke 418 speaks of proclaiming liberty to the captives.
One way that we're doing that is through the Prison Witnessing Initiative.
Our Prison Ministry program appeals to prisoners searching for answers if they can't have physical freedom, mental freedom.
And who's going to give it to them? Where does it come from?
It comes from outside the prison system.
Now when you think of two million people in our prison system in the United States, there are several countries that have populations of two million people.
So in effect, entering the Prison Ministry is entering another country.
A country where people need relief, they need understanding, they need spiritual strength and education, they need meaning to their lives.
Think of it as a gated community of two million residents. That's quite a territory.
Our group is one of Jehovah's Witnesses. Once I became my adolescent, I never wanted anyone telling me what to do.
I decided I didn't want to serve Jehovah anymore. After I left Jehovah, I didn't have any type of direction.
I was meeting drug dealers, hustlers, people who were just trying to do anything and everything to get money.
I was arrested for conspiracy to sell drugs and sentenced to a long term and a federal penitentiary.
I eventually found the Bible. All I did was read the Bible, read the Bible and read the Bible during that time.
I was having a change of thinking in mind because I always knew I had to return to Jehovah.
Jehovah was always here, but it was just so hard to return.
I started writing a branch, asking for literature to come into the federal penitentiary.
The day I met brother Shabeta, I was actually praying, supplicating, and I was saying Jehovah, Jehovah, I need to talk to somebody.
So now I hear knock on my door.
And I got this man looking at him and I'm looking at him. He opens the door, looks at me. He says,
are you an elder? Yes. And then I'll never forget what he did next.
The door was open and he reached out and he touched my arm. He says, what are you, some kind of an angel or something?
I thought maybe it was nuts. An angel. Hey buddy, I'm so far from an angel.
It's laughable and he laughs. He says, do you know what I was just doing?
No. I was on my knees. I was begging God to send somebody. I was ready to crack.
As members of the prison ministry team, we have three basic things we plan.
We plan our meetings as they would be in a local kingdom hall.
And we have the inmates participate in the meetings.
We have Bible study and one-on-one checkering.
We also have special events we plan for.
We have the baptism of inmates once they progress to that point.
We conduct the memorial, passing the emblems just as we would outside and kingdom halls and memorial facilities once a year.
Something happens to them. The change is them. We teach them and shepherd them.
They develop a love for God and a love for others.
It seems uncharacteristic because they come in as messed up felons and they leave as loving people.
Upon being released from prison, my life is very different.
Jehovah has just been blessed me by having a wonderful family.
Jehovah has blessed me with a wonderful, beautiful wife.
He has also allowed me to reach the goal of becoming a regular pioneer.
Jehovah has also allowed me to become a ministerial servant.
It's just too many blessings, too many things to count.
Without the prison ministry, I probably would have never been able to have a...
to be able to progress virtually.
The prison ministry helps us to be structured, being taught the same Bible teachings that people who are free have.
It's just a love and arrangement that's provided by Jehovah.
That those men in there love and appreciate. I know I do. I appreciate it dearly.
It's a vast prison population. It is truly right for the harvest.
But if you're genuine in your heart about wanting to know about Jehovah, he's going to take care.
He's going to watch over you. He's going to give you what you need.
Whether you're in prison or you're free, he's going to take care of you.
We are so happy to see the results of the efforts put forth by our brothers to reach people of all backgrounds.
Indeed, there's a lot of work to be done in making Jehovah's name known.
We met a brother in Britain who wanted to expand his ministry and Jehovah blessed his prayers.
My name's Jonathan and I've been in Bethel for eight years.
When I was young and people would ask me what my goals were, I'd always say it was to pioneer.
I don't think I really knew what my goals were at that time.
It took quite a while for me to find out what I really wanted to do.
After I finished school, I did a course for two years in business studies and then I did work four times.
But I think through my associations, I started realizing that really there's more that I could be doing in Jehovah's service.
Because I wanted to taste what Bethel was like, it made me want to commute.
You can come as a visitor, you can come as a guest, you can come to see friends that you've got in Bethel.
But it's not the same as actually being in Bethel and working along with the brothers in the department.
I really enjoy my assignment at Bethel.
So I helped to look after the accommodation.
We get requests from different members of the family to have personal guests.
We may receive requests from other branches and my job is to try and care for the accommodation needs.
It's a really great privilege to be able to work along and to help the family and that is what our department does.
Something that I've always felt was it would have been nicer to come to Bethel earlier.
I don't know why I waited till I was 23.
So if anyone else is thinking about what they're going to do, should I try Bethel or just try it?
Because what you experience at Bethel, you'd not regret.
We would like to make you aware of a fascinating story that's been posted on the video and demand section of JW Broadcasting.
It's about the dedication of a new assembly hall in the Amazon rainforest in Brazil.
The video highlights how Jehovah's name came to be praised by neighbors and authorities as a result of this new facility.
In Matthew chapter 10, Jesus prophesied about how his disciples would be treated.
In verse 22 he said,
And you will be hated by all people on account of my name, but the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
Knowing these scriptures, it comes as no surprise that we meet opposition from time to time.
But as Jesus said, it all takes place on account of his name and by extension, Jehovah's name.
We are proud to represent the sovereign of the universe and his son, even if we are persecuted.
Brother Nikolai Nigrich from Russia has experienced persecution firsthand many times.
In spite of that, he has maintained his joy in his service to Jehovah.
My mother came very close to never seeing me again.
I asked her to tell me what happened.
She told me that in April of 1952, she had been sent to a labor camp.
She got ten years for refusing to betray the brothers taking the lead.
It was a big thing back then that a pregnant woman was given such a long sentence.
I was born in the labor camp on August 6, 1952.
As my mother told me, one winter I became critical at El.
I had tuberculosis of the bone.
The doctors didn't think I could recover, so they called my father to come and take me away.
I was only a year and a half old.
My father picked me up and carried me to the village where he lived.
He showed me to some doctors and they were horrified at my condition.
They were afraid to take responsibility for me.
My father said that one of the doctors there, a woman, felt compassion for me
and said she would take on my case.
The treatment she prescribed was very painful, but it worked.
I did recover from the disease.
One sunny day we were at home in our house in the village.
My grandmother was there and my father.
I looked and the woman came in the house and stood in the door.
And someone, either my father, for my grandmother said,
that's your mother, then I looked at her again more closely.
She was wearing a striped dress.
Later I realized that I had been wearing the same striped clothes
when my father came to the prison to get me.
She took out a toy car, green, made of metal.
She pushed it and it clotted out to my feet and stopped.
It was the first time that I really understood that I had a mother.
She had come and she was right here.
I felt very good.
I ran out to the field in front of our house and shouted to our neighbors.
Mama has come. Mama has come.
This was the first really happy event in my life that I remember,
that I met my mother.
I get excited just remembering it.
How it all happened.
But my mother and I came very close to never seeing each other again.
She said that all the women in the labor camp worked in the forest.
The snow was waist high.
It was very cold.
They were cutting down trees.
On one occasion, they were being led back to the camp from the forest.
My mother's sled got stuck on a tree stump.
The horse could not pull it free.
The guards somehow didn't notice.
Then they realized that a horse and a prisoner were missing.
One of the soldiers ran towards my mother with a rifle.
He was already cocking it.
My mother told me later that she was terrified.
She thought that her life was over.
But the other soldiers stopped him and said, it's not her fault.
She got stuck.
That story I will always remember.
I grew up partly without a mother because she was imprisoned.
Then it turned out that my son grew up without a father because I was imprisoned.
I was also imprisoned for my faith.
When I was sent to prison, my wife was pregnant.
I didn't see my son until a few months after he was born.
The first time she brought him, he was tiny.
She was during the winter and it was very cold.
She brought him to the prison to see me.
She wrapped him in blankets and there he was, wiggling.
She showed him to me, saying, here is your son.
I felt very tense and trapped because the prison woman was standing right behind me.
But I also felt very happy to have a real family.
It was very hard to leave them.
I wanted to hold my son but they didn't let me.
The god whom we serve, Jehovah, acted in our hearts and minds with his holy spirit.
So these trials did not affect us in the way they affected other people.
We were optimistic about the future.
We were confident that God would not leave his servants.
That's all of this in my own case.
Now I can look back with a smile while remembering everything I lived through.
What an example for all of us to imitate.
When my wife and I visit different branches on various speaking assignments,
what encourages us the most is seeing how our brothers and sisters worldwide remain loyal to Jehovah.
Brother Mark Numer and his wife went on such a trip recently and came back with many fine experiences.
You probably remember Brother Numer as the co-anchor in the December 2014 monthly program.
As a headquarters representative, Brother Numer had the privilege of visiting three branches in Africa.
Recently, Sister Numer and I had the privilege of joining Brother and Sister Maray in visiting three countries in East Africa.
Our first stop was Tanzania, where we visited the remote translation office which is located in Dar Salam.
There are 41 devoted brothers and sisters working at this office assisting with Swahili translation.
We also had the opportunity to join the brothers and the ministry and to witness firsthand their zeal for the truth.
Many recall Clinton, Wendy, Winkleman.
They served at Patterson before being assigned to Tanzania as Besselites in Foreign Service.
Here you'll notice Wendy is conducting a Bible study with a woman on the right.
But woman on the left is also her Bible student that came early in his waiting her turn.
The people in Tanzania are hungry for the truth.
The metropolitan witnessing is now being done in Dar Salam.
Since it began nine months ago, over 150,000 pieces of literature have been taken.
Hundreds of requests for Bible studies have been made and several people have begun attending meetings and are making spiritual progress.
In the village areas of Tanzania, people are also receiving a witness, but from their mobile devices.
They are able to get in contact with their students, direct them to the website, and show them videos.
During our visit, the brothers arranged for a special meeting connecting 19 other locations and they had a combined attendance of over 18,500.
This is Tanzania's Broadcasting Department.
They utilized a simple router to connect all 18,000 friends, and if that for some reason didn't connect, they had a B plan.
Each location had its own designated cell phone, and the brothers on standby ready to connect each one.
Thanks to these young brothers, we had smooth connections the entire program.
On to our next stop, Kenya. For Paddy and I, it was like coming home.
30 years later, some things still haven't changed. Paddy's still making great coffee.
When we arrived as missionaries, Kenya had about 3,000 publishers. Now they have over 27,000.
Shell is one of the many young ones we met when we were in the circuit work.
Now, he is serving as a translator in the RTO.
This family adopted us when we were new missionaries and helped us learn Swahili.
The little girl on the bike is now serving at Bethel along with her husband.
We were so happy to see many of these young ones grow up into spiritual men and women.
The parents of these ones really took to heart the importance of training their children, and we can see the good results that came from it.
The total attendance for the special program in Kenya was over 35,000.
And it was streamed to 25 locations, including Sudan.
On to our next stop, Malawi. The branch office is located in Le Longway.
The attendance for the special meeting was 43,479 from seven different locations.
Not long ago, our Bethel family listened to a branch report from Malawi about unity players.
They have a battery that can be charged by a solar panel or a hand crank.
Traveling overseers download new songs and videos onto a memory stick.
From there, they connect the memory stick to the unity player, which acts as a sound system for playing the new songs.
The player also has a microphone, which helps when they are teaching the congregation.
When they want to show one of our videos with the projector, they connect the memory stick in the projector and the unity player for sound.
This wonderful provision from Jehovah's Organization has helped so many of our dear brothers and sisters to really benefit even in remote areas.
They get to know more of their international brotherhood and the governing body.
The brothers are keen on helping as many as possible to obtain and practice the new songs.
The brothers take out their cell phones and turn on the Bluetooth setting.
They share the music via Bluetooth from one brother's phone to another brother's phone.
In just a short time, the whole congregation has the new music on their phones.
They just can't wait to get home and start learning and singing the new songs.
A portion of our visit was spent strengthening and encouraging translation teams.
Brother Morey was particularly pleased to speak with all four of the remote translation offices.
Even though the internet is limited, people are still benefiting from JW.org in Malawi.
The brothers have traveled out to Nomueda to do recordings for the Yao language.
While the RTO is under construction, the audio video department will set up a mobile studio in the local kingdom hall.
Yao is mainly a spoken language, so the brothers download recordings or videos on a memory stick and take it in the field service.
So the brothers play the audio publication for the householder on their own radio while they follow along in the printed publication.
A big lesson we learned during our visit is that it's not about technology, it's not about possessions, it's all about people.
And they're willing spirit that is getting the work done.
And there is so much work yet to do in the lands we visited.
It is our prayer that the sharp sickle in the hand of Christ continue to reap the people of Tanzania, Kenya and Malawi.
Are truly a worldwide united brotherhood, don't you agree?
On this month's program alone, we've seen reports from our dear brothers and sisters in South Africa, the United States, Britain, Tanzania, Malawi and Kenya.
We will now take you to Myanmar.
The brothers there have put together a music video that highlights how young ones in any culture can prove that they want to be part of Jehovah's name people.
We assure that you'll not only enjoy the music, but we'll also appreciate seeing how our brothers in Myanmar dress and the type of makeup that our sisters use.
If you want to learn more about this fascinating culture, please refer to the explanation that is found in our 2013 yearbook on page 99.
But for now, let's enjoy listening to this song that is entitled Give You My All.
The choice is that I could make so many pathways that I could take.
I know that someday I'll make my vow is now in blessing.
We'll take their steps.
This isn't something somebody chose for me. It's something I want to do.
I want to stand up on my two feet, answer the call us for fun, my best while I'm still young, decide with you and your son my two feet.
Jehovah has taken out from the nations of people for his name, and we are proud to be the ones who bear his name today as Jehovah's Witnesses, just like the many examples we've seen on this month's program.
We want to be used by Jehovah in teaching people the divine name of our Heavenly Father, despite our circumstances or background.
To conclude the program, we have greetings from our brothers and sisters in Israel, namely from the Jerusalem and the Tel Aviv Hebrew congregations.
There is a great need in Israel since most of the territory has yet to be covered.
The congregation in Jerusalem is made up of 40 publishers and they have a large territory to cover.
The ratio is one publisher to almost 27,000 people.
A Russian group is also associated with the Hebrew congregation.
We commend our brothers and sisters in Jerusalem for their hard work in making Jehovah's name known.
The Tel Aviv Hebrew congregation has a total of almost 80 publishers and the ratio is one publisher to 10,000 people.
We were happy to see these images of a family and a grandmother enjoying their family worship evening.
This time they're making a puzzle and reading the Bible together.
Also in Tel Aviv, this is a group of brothers and sisters that came together to watch the monthly program of JW Broadcasting.
In July last year the special metropolitan public witnessing program started in Tel Aviv, which is resulted in considerable interest from the local people.
For many Israelis this has been the first time that they have heard about a day Yovar as Jehovah's Witnesses are called in Hebrew.
Thank you for joining us this month. This is JW Broadcasting from Brooklyn, New York.